This is 2014. That was the year that
Slack actually launched. I was
interviewed by MIT Technology Review and
asked if we were working to improve
Slack. I said, "I feel like what we have
right now is just a giant piece of [__]
It's just terrible and we should be
humiliated that we offer this to the
public." To me, that was like, "You
should be embarrassed. If you can't see
almost limitless opportunities to
improve, then you shouldn't be designing
a product."
>> Slack was famous for being one of the
early consumerized B2B SaaS products.
>> At more than one company all hands, I
made everyone in the company repeat
[music] this as a chant. In the long
run, the measure of our success will be
the amount of value that we create for
customers. And you can put effort into
demonstrating that you have created
[music] this value and stuff like that,
but there's no substitute for actually
having created it.
>> Something else I heard that you often
espouse is friction in the product
experience is actually often a good
thing.
>> It It became an assumption that you
should always be trying to remove
friction when the challenge is really
comprehension. If your software kind of
stops me to and asks me to make a
decision and I don't really understand
it, you make me feel stupid. If people
could get over the idea of reducing
friction as a number one goal or
reducing the number of clicks or taps or
something, [music] and instead focus on,
"How can I make this simple? How do I
prevent people from having to think in
order to use my software?"
>> You started two companies, both famously
pivoted. I imagine many people come to
you for advice on pivoting.
>> The decision is about like, have you
exhausted [music] the possibilities?
Creating the distance so that you can
make an intellectual, rational decision
about it rather than an emotional
decision is essential. And the reason I
say you have to be coldly rational about
it is because [music] it's [__]
humiliating.
Today my guest is Stewart Butterfield, a
founder and product legend who rarely
does podcasts. Stewart founded Flickr
and then Slack, which he sold to
Salesforce in one of the biggest
acquisitions in tech history at the
time. There is so much product and
leadership wisdom locked away in his
head. I feel like our conversation just
scratched the surface. We chat about
utility curves, something he calls the
owner's delusion, a hilarious pattern he
sees at companies he calls
hyperrealistic work-like activities.
What he's learned about product and
craft and taste and Parkinson's law, why
you need to obsess with not making your
users think, [music]
the backstory on his legendary "We Don't
Sell Saddles Here" memo, and so much
more. A huge thank [music] you to Noah
Weiss, Chris Cordell, Ali Rail, and
Johnny Rodgers for suggesting [music]
topics and questions for this
conversation. This is a really special
one and I really hope to have Stewart
back to delve even deeper. If you enjoy
this podcast, [music] don't forget to
subscribe and follow it in your favorite
podcasting app or YouTube. It helps
tremendously. And if you become an
annual subscriber of my newsletter, you
get 17 incredible products for free for
an entire year, including Devon, lovable
Repl it Bolt, Linear, Superhuman,
Dscript, Perplexity, Warp, Granola,
Magic Patterns, Raycast, and Maven. Head
on over to lennysnewsletter.com and
click product pass. With that, I bring
you Stewart Butterfield after a short
word from our sponsors.
Here's a puzzle for you. What do OpenAI,
Cursor, Perplexity, Vercel, Plaid, and
hundreds of other winning companies have
in common? The answer is they're all
powered by today's sponsor, WorkOS. If
you're building software for
enterprises, you've probably felt the
pain of integrating single sign-on,
SCIM, RBAC, audit logs, and other
features required by big customers.
WorkOS turns those deal blockers into
drop-in APIs with a modern developer
platform built specifically for B2B
SaaS. Whether you're a seed-stage
startup trying to land your first
enterprise customer or a unicorn
expanding globally, WorkOS is the
fastest path to becoming
enterprise-ready [music] and unlocking
growth. They're essentially Stripe for
enterprise features. Visit workos.com to
get [music] started or just hit up their
Slack support where they have real
engineers in there who answer your
questions super fast. WorkOS allows you
to build like the best with delightful
APIs, comprehensive docs, and a smooth
developer experience. Go to workos.com
to make your app enterprise-ready today.
This episode is brought to you by
Metronome. You just launched your new
shiny AI product. The new pricing page
looks awesome, but behind it,
>> [music]
>> last-minute glue code, messy
spreadsheets, and running ad-hoc queries
to figure out what to build. Customers
get invoices they can't understand,
engineers are chasing billing bugs,
finance can't close the books. With
Metronome, you hand it all off to the
real-time billing infrastructure that
just works. Reliable, flexible, and
built to grow with you. Metronome turns
raw usage events into accurate invoices,
[music]
gives customers bills they actually
understand, and keeps every team in sync
in real time. Whether you're launching
usage-based pricing, managing enterprise
contracts, or rolling out new AI
services, Metronome does the heavy
lifting so that you can focus on your
product, not your billing. That's why
some of the fastest-growing companies in
the world, like OpenAI and Anthropic,
run their billing on Metronome. Visit
metronome.com to learn more. That's
metronome.com.
Stewart, thank you so much for being
here and welcome to the podcast. Thank
you for having me. I'm excited. I'm even
more excited. I'm so honored to have you
here. I never told you this, but you've
been towards the very top of my wish
list of guests to have on this podcast
ever since I started this podcast a few
years ago. So, I'm very excited that
we're finally making this happen. I have
so many questions for you.
My first question is just what the heck
are you up to these days? I feel like
ever since you left Slack, we haven't
heard much from Stewart. I'm curious
what you're up to. Hopefully you're just
chilling. I'm mostly just chilling. I
left Salesforce um
2 and 1/2 years ago and I have a 2 and
1/2 year old. So, she was actually born
3 days after my my last day. So, a lot
of time with family and it's like an
enormous privilege to be able to spend
time with young kids while they're while
they're young. Um
no new company to announce or anything
like that. Um
I do get a lot of emails and texts. Like
basically like every 3 to 6 weeks
there's this cycle because Cal
Henderson, who's the CTO of Slack, and
who also we worked together on Flickr,
so have worked together now for 23
years, have been talking about what we
want to do next um
if there is something. But you know,
honestly, the the big challenge has been
uh I think these things are kind of
destroying the world. Um and what we're
good at is making software. Um so, if
you find some way to make software that
helped people use their phones less
often, then that would be of a a big
winner, but uh haven't come up with
anything good. A lot of philanthropic
work. Uh nothing to announce there yet,
but there's like some cool um projects
I'm working on and a lot of like just
personal creative art projects and
supporting other artists and and stuff
like that. To prep for this chat,
I talked to so many people that have
worked with you over the years to try to
figure out what you taught them about
building product, building teams,
building companies that most stuck with
them, that most helped them build
amazing products. The first is a is a
concept called utility curves. This came
up a bunch across so many people that
have worked with you.
Talk about what is a utility curve, how
you think use that to build better
products. This is pretty easy cuz it's a
very familiar S-curve where, you know,
you have uh it's flat, it starts arcing
up, and then there's a really steep
part, and then it levels off again.
And on the horizontal axis,
uh you can think of cost or effort. And
on the vertical axis, it's value or
convenience. It kind of depends exactly
what you're talking about. But the idea
is um
the first bit of effort you put into
something doesn't result in a huge
amount of value, and then there's some
magic threshold where it produces an
enormous amount of value, and then
continued investment doesn't really pay
off. The most basic
example I can think of is let's say
you're making a hammer. And on that
bottom axis, it's now quality. And if
the hammer uh has a handle that breaks
with any impact, then it's totally
useless. And if you make it a little bit
stronger, it's still pretty useless. And
it's kind of like junk junk junk junk
junk, okay, good, great. Then it doesn't
matter anymore. If you're making an app,
okay,
this app's going to have users, and so
let's make a users table in a database,
and so far you have generated no value.
The reason I I felt like this was so
important is because we would talk about
like a feature.
Um and usually features are thought of
as as binary. Like you you either have
this feature or you don't.
And so, the argument I guess was,
have we just not invested enough in
this,
or have we got all the value or
convenience or, you know, quality or
whatever that we could get out of this?
Um and and we could have admitted the
point of diminishing returns and it just
doesn't matter. And I I think in many
cases people will
add a feature, it's not good enough, um
and so people don't use it or appreciate
it, but now you've added some complexity
to the app, and then people give up or
take it back or, you know, they tried
something in in testing and they don't
get the results they want, and so they
decide that this is a thing isn't worth
doing. And so, we would try to really
investigate and and decide whether we
were on the first shallow part of the
curve, the second shallow part of the
curve, or we were, you know, we're just
coming up to it.
So, I think it's a lot easier to
understand the value of this when you're
talking about a specific app and a and a
specific uh
feature. But um I think it was
ultimately helpful in getting people to
like understand whether something was
was worth it or not. Okay, so just to
mirror back what I'm hearing, there's
kind of this if you visualize this
curve, at the bottom it's like, "I don't
even know what this is." And then up the
curve is like, "Okay, I sort of get it."
And then at the top is, "Okay, I can't
live without this now that I understand
what this is for." It feels like it's
like a really it's a different way of
thinking about getting to the aha moment
for someone where they see, "Okay, saved
items. I get it. I need to use this
constantly."
So, it feels like this works both for a
specific feature and also just for
Slack. Like getting people to even
understand, "Here's what Slack can do
for you and then now I can't live
without Slack. And essentially this is a
lens you use to figure out where to
spend product resources because if you
don't get up that curve to I get it and
I can't live without it, nothing else
matters. Is that the way is that the
framework? Yeah, yeah. And I think then
you layer on another concept like the um
>> [snorts]
>> Bezos used the term divine discontent.
Uh
the line actually moves because once
people are familiar with a piece of
software or the way a feature is
implemented or something like that,
their standards go up and so the
there's like this competition. And
again, this axis can be utility is the
best general term for it, but it could
be quality, convenience, um
speed, it could be any any number of
things. But as you improve your search
capability or if as as you improve your
login experience or your forget
experience or your checkout experience
or whatever, everyone else's as well and
so there's this continued investment.
And when you know, forget about thinking
about a new feature, you're looking at
how the product works overall and
usually things get kind of implemented
once and then
if they're lucky, they get improved upon
periodically. Most things get improved
upon very infrequently and some things
get improved upon never. And
you know, just I'm going to give an
example at the absolute extreme cuz I
don't actually don't know
how long this has been, but
I try not to criticize other people's
software so much because I'm very
familiar with the tradeoffs and
prioritization and how hard it can be
and blah blah blah blah. But okay, so it
most people have the Gmail calendar app
on their phone. I travel a fair bit. I'm
mostly in the Eastern time zone,
sometimes in Mountain time, sometimes in
Pacific, sometimes in
English time and sometimes in
uh Japan, Central Europe.
There's like a you know,
maybe 10 time zones, 12 time zones um
that I would ever choose.
When you
uh hit the option to set the time zone
on an event in Google Calendar on the
iOS app, it presents all the time zones
in the world in alphabetical order. And
that's like the I mean, there's probably
worse orderings, but that it doesn't
there's no value in that. Um and even
when you start searching,
um it still presents them in
alphabetical order by country with that
term. So, if I'm in California and I'm
trying to set an appointment for next
week when I'm back in New York, and I
type in e a s t,
then I get a bunch of garbage. Okay,
East ern e r n. And then the first one
is Eastern Australia, New South Wales.
Um and then Eastern Australia,
Queensland. And then Eastern Australia,
Daylight Savings and Eastern Australia,
Standard Time. And then you're like,
well, [__] What I
I can't remember which one is Daylight
Savings and which one is Standard Time
and we know what.
I could keep going like this for a
while. This is an app that's used by at
least hundreds of millions of people,
presumably every single Google employee.
It's bananas how bad it is. There's so
many like there's all these clever
things you could do. Like you know me,
I'm on the West Coast,
first option should be the East Coast
and vice versa. But it definitely
shouldn't be that every time zone is
presented with equal you know, value.
There's I don't even know, but like a
couple hundred time zones. I grew up in
Canada, there's a Newfoundland has its
own time zone which is offset by half an
hour. The population of Newfoundland is
about half a million people, not that
many people go to visit Newfoundland,
maybe a million people in all of
history. So like a million and a half
out of 8 billion people. And there's
Newfoundland, you know, like the same
with China time which is like 25% of the
world's population and this stuff.
Anyway, I
and that was a little bit longer than I
intended to go on this example, but it
is um
uh it's crazy cuz no one's going to
switch to Gmail or to to G Suite Google
Calendar from Outlook Exchange because
the time zone picker is good. So and
maybe in some sense, it doesn't matter.
But at the same time, there's a real
value in in delighting customers and
there's an emotional connection that
they form or don't form. Um
And in some cases that could be really
positive like they would recommend it
and when they switch companies or decide
to start their own company, they're
going to choose to use this product or
advocate for it because of that
emotional connection. And vice versa,
they'll also be like, I
hate this thing, it drives me bananas, I
really think we should stop using it or
you know, advocate for the alternative.
Uh and I I think people just don't
appreciate or come back to those things
often enough. And then there's this
category of like really essential parts
of the app. Again, like account
creation, sign up, forgot password, you
know, things like that that
for most organizations very infrequently
get a lot of love and and iteration and
improvement despite the fact that the
kind of the quality bar has gone up
across the board and it continually goes
up.
>> Let's go down that rabbit hole a little
bit more around delight and craft. Slack
was famous for being one of the early,
let's say, consumerized B2B SaaS
products. Slack leaned into delight and
experience and craft and a great
experience. And you just as a product
leader, I'd say is are known as as very
taste forward, very craft oriented
leader, which is pretty rare and I think
continues to be rare. So, there's a few
things I want to talk about here. One is
uh taste. I heard at a talk you gave at
a really unique you gave a talk on taste
and you have a really unique perspective
on just what taste is, what product
taste looks like. Can you share that?
There is a lot of, you know, going back
to the utility curves again, people who
are obsessed with this one little thing
and you know, keep on adding more and
more detail improvements beyond the
point where it makes much of a
difference.
But um
I guess a couple things about taste. So,
one is can you learn to develop it? I
think so because like
the word literally comes from
experiencing food and putting stuff in
your mouth. And can people become better
chefs with training? Yes, absolutely.
Undoubtedly some people have a natural
advantage or or you know, born with this
ability to make discernments that are
difficult for other people to make and
stuff like that, but you can definitely
practice and you can definitely get
better. The second thing I'd say is um
you can create a real advantage for
yourself, for your product, for your
company um by leaning into it because
most people don't have good taste and
don't invest. And so, you're probably
familiar with the
again, Jeff Bezos line, your margin is
my opportunity.
Um and pretty obvious what he meant by
that.
I would tell the story at Slack over and
over again and actually made it part of
the new hire welcome. So, uh I'm I'm
going I'm in Vancouver at our Vancouver
office and I'm going for a walk with
Brandon Velestuk who's our um at the
time
creative director for product
development. I think that was his title.
And uh we're in the Yaletown
neighborhood in Vancouver. So, there's
like really narrow sidewalks cuz it used
to be a warehouse district and now it's
like, you know, fancy restaurants and
nail salons and geeks and stuff.
And as it does in Vancouver, it starts
to rain. We don't have umbrellas. We're
walking back to the office and most
people have umbrellas and we're you
know, kind of on these narrow sidewalks
with people coming towards us with
umbrellas. And we noticed how few people
would move their umbrella out of the
way. And of course, you know, the other
person
their umbrella, the pokey bits are
exactly at eye level for for people
walking
towards them and we would get like, you
know, forced off the sidewalk or like
having to duck down or
whatever. And we it became a game where
we were guessing, is this person going
to tilt their umbrella out of the way so
we can pass or not? And something like
1/3 of the people would do it. And we
had this conversation about it where
it's like,
okay, I can think of three reasons why
people wouldn't do it. One is they have
very few avenues in their life to
exercise power and this is one of them
and they're just like want to get out
there and dominate people and cause
suffering. So,
shouldn't ascribe to malice that which
can be ascribed to ignorance. And so,
that's probably you know, probably is
the explanation for a tiny tiny tiny
percentage of people. But the other two
explanations aren't that great either.
One is that uh they see it's happening,
they see they're pushing other people
off the sidewalk
or poking them in the eye or whatever
and they're just like, [__] that's too
bad. I you know, I wish there was
something I could do about that, but I
can't think of anything. And the last
reason is they just don't notice at all.
But they're just oblivious to their
impact on on other people and they're
they're so in their head.
And I can't really think of any other
explanations for it besides that. And so
we would say at Slack like
tilting your umbrella is our
opportunity. You know, that's not a
great rephrase of the your margin is my
opportunity, but your failure to really
be considerate and uh
exercise this courtesy and really be
empathic about other people's experience
is an an advantage you can create a
critical advantage. And I think that
there's many reasons why Slack was
successful at the moment it was
successful and I think we had a bunch of
really wonderful tailwinds and and all
of that stuff, but it wouldn't have
grown the way it did without those
little conveniences which caused people
to form an emotional connection because
a lot of our growth came from you know,
startup A uses Slack and then someone
leaves startup A for startup B and
startup B doesn't use Slack yet, and
they would be like, "Oh my god, you
guys, you really get This is
This is so good. You've got to try it."
And uh
And the the spread was driven by that
cross-pollination and and people really
genuinely advocating for it. That is an
amazing metaphor. I I
>> [laughter]
>> I love that one moment became like a
value of product craftsmanship, but it's
like
>> totally irrelevant business like is not
a very common use case, and on you know,
company swag and and stuff like that. Is
there an example I mean I imagine there
are many, but from the time of building
Slack, especially in the early days,
where you chose to go big on
craftsmanship and experience and and
delight versus speed, where you thought
looking back that was a really great
idea and it worth really core to
success? Here's a bunch of little
examples.
Um so
someone else came up with this idea,
and I'm
I'm trying to remember who it was.
Um but I it's a maybe Andrew maybe Ben
Brown, something like that, who was
like, "Okay, where Why do we ask people
for email address and password if um
they
their ownership of the email address was
the thing that allowed them to create
the account in the first place? Why
don't we just ask them for their email
address and then send them a link?" And
so when Slack's first version of the
mobile app came out, we're like,
"Typing your password on your phone, if
you have any
you know, minimal threshold of of
password hygiene is a terrible
experience. They have capital H,
lowercase Q, 6 correct period.
So let's just
have them enter the email address. We'll
send them a link. The link will
automatically open the app and and
authenticate them."
And so there's one a little example.
Wow, so you guys invented the magic link
uh experience.
>> someone else invented I want to be clear
that. Uh I I had seen that idea
somewhere else like someone else blog
post about it or something like that,
but we were the first ones that to my
knowledge that that really kind of like
scaled that and made it uh a standard.
There is another one which we we you
know, we really puzzled about in the
very early days where people have a long
history of using messaging apps from
like
AOL Instant Messenger to SMS to um
WhatsApp, where their expectation is
they get a notification for every
message that's received. And in the case
of Slack, that doesn't make as much
sense because you're a a member of many
channels, and the messages may not be
for you. And so that's why we have that
at tagging people and um you know,
We certainly didn't invent that. That
was that was Twitter.
Um
but what we realized was people were
signing up for Slack to you know, and
it's like one engineer on this team
inside of this larger organization
inside of this larger company, and they
would pull in the person next to them,
and they would say, "Let's try it out."
And then they would send a message, and
then the person would be like, "I didn't
get a notification. This is this is
bullshit."
Um
so we reluctantly decided that we had to
send notifications for every single
message as the default for new accounts.
But once you had I don't remember what
the thresholds were. I think it's what
once you had received 10 messages, we
would pop up this little thing that
says, "Hey, you have our default
settings for notifications. We don't
want Slack to be noisy for you. Would
you like to switch to our recommended
settings?" And then they would just
click a link, and it would
you know, have what should be the
default, which is you only get a
notification if it's a DM or someone
tags you. But we realized it was worth
that investment to get people over the
hump. A much more uh
Well, here's a I'll give you one one
more simple one and and then one kind of
more complex one.
People would
just like the I can't remember if it's
called urgent or important, but the flag
in in Outlook that like you know, set
the priority of a message for the
recipients, always got abused inside of
every company. As as soon as someone
does it, like everyone's like, "Okay,
I'm going to do that, too, for my
message." And so all of your messages
have the little flag, and it's becomes
useless.
We have at everyone, which causes a
notification to be sent to every member
of the channel when the message is sent.
And people would start you know, like
someone would find this feature inside
of an organization. They would at
everyone. Everyone would get a
notification. And then the next person
to send a message was like, "Well, my
thing's more important than um Bob's
saying. I'm going to also at everyone."
And it became really obnoxious, and
people would complain about it, but it
was a
I don't know.
I guess tragedy of the commons is not
quite exactly the same thing, but it was
a this real dynamic that happened over
and over again. So um
we came up with what was called the
shouty rooster. And internally we said,
"Don't be a cock." Um but we didn't
obviously say that publicly. When you at
everyone, a little rooster would
pop up, and it would have like these
sound waves coming out of its mouth and
being really obnoxious, and say, "Hey,
this is going to cause a notification
for 147 people in eight different time
zones. Are you sure you want to send
this message with the at everyone?" Um
and of course that worked amazingly, and
it dropped off. Um and again, it was
really trying to shape people's behavior
so that they use We want to Slack to be
very flexible, um but we knew that there
was ways to use it that would be
annoying and and difficult for everyone.
And so try to shape the communication
culture inside the organization to take
best advantage of it. That feature still
exists. I see that rooster all the or
no, I don't see it all. Well, actually I
do at channel cuz I run a big Slack. Uh
so I see that rooster and that survived.
Yeah.
Um yeah, that survived and and good uh
because it's
Sure. It was a trivially easy thing to
implement, and made a really big
difference. But it also taught people
how the product worked cuz I mean people
probably didn't know that at everyone or
at channel um
Right. Well, didn't think about the cost
at least. Genius. Yeah.
Here's here's one more.
Uh
So we decided we're going to do do not
disturb as a feature.
Um
>> [clears throat]
>> And we had this not a conundrum, but we
you're trying to take into account all
the all the different uses of Slack cuz
at the time we be implementing this
like 2017, there was
you know,
tens of thousands of of paying
customers that organizations, hundreds
of them, probably millions of users,
maybe hundreds of thousands of
organizations. I don't remember how
many. Um and everyone had set up stuff
the way that they liked it, including
things like ops alerts going into
channels for on-call engineers for for
you know, some of the biggest
systems uh and and apps in the world.
And so we couldn't just like deploy it
right away.
We realized that some of the
decision-makers, the owners of the
organizations, were going to have really
strong opinions about this. We also
realized that some of the engineers are
going to have strong opinions, and we
wanted to figure out a way to kind of
balance the concerns
and give people appropriate means of
control. So we came up with this really
elaborate system for the rollout, which
was
we told everyone um
I'm sorry, every every Slack
administrator that this was coming weeks
before it came.
And we told them that we were going to
set a default for their organization,
which I believe was um
either 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. in their
local time zone or or 8:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. I can't remember which was.
But also that they could override that
default.
And also that the individual end users
could override that
system owner default.
And finally that the system owner could,
if they changed the default again, would
override all of the the end users'
preferences.
And then the end users could
uh
override them again.
And it it wasn't to create this dynamic
where people are who are at war, but so
that you could change a policy, and then
people could still customize and and
stuff like that. But this was
you know, a much longer and more
convoluted process, but it allowed the
millions of people who were using Slack
to get the feature without creating a
bunch of conflict and without people
turning it off automatically. And I
think critically, with setting a bunch
of defaults um because if we didn't set
the default, most people wouldn't turn
it on at all. You know, like there
wasn't If we didn't default you to do
not disturb from 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.,
um you probably
if you're the average person, wouldn't
ever do it yourself. Um so that's a
another elaborate example uh where I
think that investment made sense because
it was a critical feature for a lot of
people, and um
if we hadn't done it that way, I think
it would have caused a lot of
complaints and conflict and and stuff
like that. Those are amazing examples. I
very much appreciate that do not disturb
feature when you guys launched that. I
still remember that coming out. I'm sure
a lot of people are very thankful for
that. Yeah.
Something else I heard that you often
espouse, which is counterintuitive to a
lot of people, is is about friction,
friction in the product experience. That
friction is actually often a good thing.
They actually it's a feature, not a bug
a lot of times, if you use it well. Talk
about your your experience there. Yeah,
well, so yes, um
and there's also another um
issue around friction, which is
it it became
like a mantra or just like a kind of uh
an assumption that you should always be
trying to remove friction.
And
uh in in some cases, that's true. You
know, we would talk about it Slack like
it it was hard to market. It's hard to
explain what it was if you had never
used it before. You could say a
messaging app for businesses or or
whatever.
But you know, like a critical
disadvantage to Slack doing out-of-home
advertising, putting up a billboard,
versus beer or cars, is no one needs to
be explained why people would want a car
or beer.
Um but everyone would have to be
explained why they why they want Slack.
Um and so the problem there is is
comprehension. And this will come up uh
an enormous amount. So now imagine you
want to get tickets to the Taylor Swift
concert in San Francisco. And you go to
the Ticketmaster website.
If you think about both your
your comprehension, it's perfect in this
case. And um that translates into the
specificity of your intent. And the
degree of your intent is also kind of
maxed out. So like, I really want to get
these tickets. And I know exactly what
they are. They're Taylor Swift tickets
for this date at this venue.
And so in that scenario, it doesn't
really matter if Ticketmaster's website
is slow. It doesn't really matter if the
payments page errors out. Like you're
going to persist and and get through it.
So obviously they're better to reduce
friction.
But in some sense it doesn't
It's not a huge amount of of value in
doing that.
Uh for most
creators of of products, there are a
handful of cases where that really is
true for you as well. And they they
include things like user registration,
um
authentication,
uh checkout flows for e-commerce. Like
I'm I am significantly more likely to
buy something if there's Apple Pay or
Shop Pay or something like that. I'm
significantly less likely to carry
through
the purchase of something if the I have
to manually enter all of the fields of
my address one at a time rather than
having one of those address pickers.
It's It's crazy, but like
the issue is my intent isn't always
100%, right? And the specificity of my
intent isn't always 100%.
So if your
thing is direct-to-consumer t-shirts and
you acquire customers through Instagram
ads, all of them know what t-shirts are.
It's like I This looks like a good
t-shirt to me.
But I'm rarely like 100% intent. I might
have like you know, very specific
intent. My intent's like 70%. So if
you're
the amount of friction is uh above that,
I just I'm not going to do it. But now
okay, people coming to slack.com,
they had some
uh friend had mentioned Slack and kind
of
talked their ear off at some point
months ago. And then they saw a news
article. And then they saw someone's
tweet. And then they saw an ad on a
website they were visiting. And they
finally said, okay, I'm going to go to
this website. So their intent is like at
the absolute minimum threshold. Like
it's just it was before that last event
happened, they were below and now
they're above. But they're just above.
The specificity of their intent, like I
need to get Taylor Swift concerts for
this date at this venue, um is also very
low cuz they're like uh it's a work
thing. I'm not sure it's a spreadsheet
or like a calendar or do you know
exactly what it is? Um
So they were coming in at
you know, 0.1% over these these critical
thresholds.
Um
>> [clears throat]
>> what was the challenge? It wasn't
friction, right? Because it's not like
they
were aiming for something and they knew
what they were aiming for and they were
just trying to get themselves to that
point.
What we had to worry about was creating
comprehension in in two senses. What is
this thing? Um
and what am I supposed to do next? And
that creation of comprehension
in the in the sense of explaining stuff,
that creation of comprehension in the
sense of the design of the
of the UI, of the screen, of the page or
whatever and the um
the visual hierarchy and the affordances
that are there and the and the um
indication of things to interact with
and and which thing should be the next
thing to do and all that stuff. That
becomes really critical and I think very
very few people recognize that. They're
like I want to get people who come to my
web page to the sign-up form as quickly
as possible. But if they don't know what
they're signing up for, they don't know
what it's going to do after, is it going
to spam them? Um
They don't know
am I going to have to pay on the next
step or or what? Then they're just going
to back out.
And this was like a a lifelong battle
because the remove friction
um
kind of orientation is so deep in
people. Again, it really makes a
difference in in those cases where
people do have an intent and they do
know what they're trying to do.
Um
It is a a poor approach when the
challenge is really comprehension. And I
think the secret is
most 70%, 80% or whatever of a product
design is in that comprehension step
because like people if they do ever open
the preferences tab and look at all the
options, rarely have an idea.
And if you can't teach them,
you know, or make it possible for them
to discover what the capabilities are,
then they're not going to take advantage
of them and they're not going to get as
much out of it. And I think that the
trick is for most of the unique parts of
any application, most of like the
specific things that your app, your
product, your software does are areas
where the challenge is going to be
comprehension instead of friction.
It really could be anything. Like
Shopify, um
the purpose of the of the service for
its end users is generally going to be
kind of clear. But most people
most first-time store openers
don't know that they can get reports. Or
if they know that they can get reports,
they don't know what kinds of reports.
And if they know what kinds of reports
they can get, they don't know how they
can tweak them and how they can um you
know, what the timing should be and
which
things that that are are more important
to display. And I could go on and on and
on and on. And people just don't
recognize that. So like the I want to
see if this is still true. I'm just
going to open my iPhone
and the clock app. And they had the most
the the craziest description
for alarms.
Uh okay, it's still it's a little bit
different.
Um
But people can look at their own phone.
Uh so I have
It says alarms and then it says sleep
and a vertical bar, wake up, and says no
alarm and a button that says change.
And then if you hit it, it says sleep is
off. In order to automatically turn on
sleep features and edit your schedule,
you need to turn sleep on. So obviously
but sleep was a good
name for this thing if you already had a
way of getting people to understand it.
If you don't, it's like ungrammatical
and incomprehensible and why would you
ever do it? And I
got to guess this It's been like this
for years.
90 plus percent and and maybe like 98%
of people just do what I do, which is
that you just create up like I want the
alarm on and I'm going to set the time
for it. And I don't know what turning
sleep on does. Um But it's a just like
the the lack of comprehension prevents
people from getting the value. And I'm
sure that there's a bunch of value
behind turning sleep on, whatever that
means. And people spend a lot of time on
those features and it integrates with
like biometrics in your watch or who
knows. I I again, I still don't know
because turning sleep on is like I don't
What does that do? And what is it going
to cost me and what impact is it going
to have?
Those examples are just to me all over
the place. And um the reason I don't use
most software where there was an actual
choice point or the reason I don't use
most features where there was a choice
point for me is because I didn't
understand what they're going to do and
I don't give a [__] And if there is one
mantra that I would use to replace that,
it's don't make me think. I don't know
if you remember that that book.
>> Absolutely.
Yeah. And honestly it's been
many more than 10 years since I read it.
So I don't even remember all the
examples in the book. But as a mantra,
that was like up there with utility
curves cuz for two reasons. One is it's
just like it it
it's expensive to make a decision. Like
you
literally burn glucose. Like there's a
metabolic action. There's like ATP
created in the mitochondria in your
neurons and like a bunch of stuff is
happening. And people do get decision
fatigue and there is like you know, a
cognitive cost of all these things. But
also there's an emotional aspect, which
is if you if your software kind of stops
me as I can and asks me to make a
decision and I don't really understand
it, you make me feel stupid. Right? I'm
like, I don't understand this.
I
Some people are are
you know, maybe their orientation is
looking that the software is stupid. But
I think most people are like, oh, I'm
dumb. And if you ever talk to people who
aren't especially technologically savvy,
you know, like the canonical example is
like people who are under 50 talking to
their parents about using some piece of
software and what they're supposed to
do, the parents almost always feel
stupid. They're the ones that are that
are wrong.
Um and so if you're causing people to
think, in the the best case, it's like
unnecessary
use of their
you know, biological resources. And then
in the worst case, you've like now made
them feel bad. Like emotionally bad. And
they're going to associate that with the
product forever. And I mean, these are
things that are just kind of rolling one
into the other. So I'm going to
uh
keep going with one last thing cuz they
just kind of come together, which is
along with reduced friction, it's like
reduce the number of clicks or taps it
takes for someone to accomplish
something, which is almost always
exactly the wrong thing. Like it's um
the easiest way like you could make any
action in your app a single click or tap
by just exposing every single
possibility on one screen that scrolls
for thousands and thousands and
thousands and thousands of pages. Right?
And obviously that's terrible. So why do
people think that a little bit of that
is good?
And
here's an example like
You open a menu, there's 14 things that
people might want to do.
Um
Okay, level one is group them into like
items and put a vertical uh sorry,
horizontal divider between them. So at
least people can kind of chunk and and
see what there is.
Step two is present the two or three
most common things or the five most
common things or whatever and then have
some form of other. And you you know,
then you go to a sub menu that has more
items. And you
the decision of like
how to tune that becomes incredibly
important. Uh I'm going to pick on
Google again just because it is
I feel like I'm Donald Trump here, but
I'm going to interrupt myself again with
a story. It's And at some some
conference or event, I don't remember
what it was, and this is probably 8
years ago, and uh it's we're in the bar
after the session has ended at this
thing, and
John Collison from Stripe is there, um
and uh Sundar, CEO of Google, is there,
and
John I I'm sorry, Patrick goes up to the
Sundar,
uh and they could talk about anything,
right? Like, you know,
Stripe wasn't at the behemoth it was
now at that point, but it was still
like, you know, a significant company,
it was up-and-coming.
And what does uh Patrick want to talk to
Sundar about? It's
in the Gmail um
app, the dragging of people like you
when you reply all
um to a message, you often want to
change so the the two recipient to the
CC, and move someone from CC to two or
something like that. And just how
physically, like the the degree of
dexterity that's required to do that
inside of the Gmail app is very high. It
still hasn't been fixed. But it really
struck me that like,
you know, Patrick could have asked for
anything. It could have been any topic.
It could have been a partnership. It was
like it was so irritating to him um that
it worked like this, and couldn't
couldn't get it over it. So, anyway,
back to bashing on on Google, who in
many respects do an incredible job, and
there's all kinds of amazing stuff they
do, and blah blah blah.
But,
the
the Gmail actions on an individual email
are broken into two very long menu items
that are different.
And
one of them doesn't exist on either
menu. There is an unlabeled icon is the
only way to do it, and that's the to
mark something as unread once it's read.
Um
I have no idea why some of the actions
are in one menu, and some of the actions
are in another menu. I I think it's
because some of them have to do with the
individual email, some of them have to
do with the whole thread, but it doesn't
seem very consistent. Every possible
thing is listed there in one place, and
so it becomes incredibly difficult to
use because sometimes you have to tap
and bur
Tell me what it means read all of the
options and say, "Okay, that I've used
the process of elimination, and it's not
here, so it must be it must be there."
The Uber doesn't work like this anymore,
but when I first brought this up to
people inside of Slack,
there was a moment when the Uber app,
when you opened it, was just "Where
would you like to go?"
and other.
And other was everything. Like, change
your payment method, uh set your
location for your vehicle, any anything
you could do in Uber.
And that was perfect because
almost all of the time people just
wanted to choose where they wanted to
go. Sometimes you wanted to change where
your pick up was cuz you weren't there
yet, or or whatever. And that was just
like, what could be simpler than I'm
going to tell you where I want to go, or
I'm going to choose something else. I
really tried to push people to
what is the thing that people, or what
is the two things, what is it, maybe
three things that people could want to
do here, and then put everything behind
other, and then um
if it takes them eight clicks or taps to
do something, but every single one is
trivially easy, that's great. If it, you
know, you reduce that to two clicks or
taps, but every part of it is this
fraught decision where I'm opening all
of the menus and trying to figure out
like which thing is the right thing, and
and like, the more comparing three
things to each other is
this difficult, four things it's kind of
like geometrically more expensive to
compare 15 different options all to the
other to see if this is the one that you
might want. Um
they you know, just becomes impossibly
expensive. So,
to me those are all really um
connected, and if we if people could get
over the idea of reducing friction as a
number one goal, or reducing the number
of clicks or taps to do something, and
instead focus on how can I make this
simple? How how do I prevent people from
having to think in order to use my
software? How can I make this trivially
easy? One one last example uh because
this this was what really influential
for me. So, I was going back and forth
between Vancouver and San Francisco at
the time when we were talking about all
this inside of Slack, and I was behind a
teenager in line to board the plane, and
it was like, you know, we're on the jet
way, it took a long time. And I was
watching her use Snapchat, and it was
insane. Like, she was tapping
at least four times a second, sometimes
like six or seven times a second. It was
like dismissing stories and doing stuff,
but there was a fluidity to it because
everything was like a dent. Do I want to
see this again? Do I want to see the
next story from this person? Do I want
to ask her to a different person? Do I
want to
like instead she she um
a notification came up, she answered
someone's thing, she took a selfie of
herself. And everything was just like
So, she was
you know, tapping four times a second
for 6 minutes. I mean, probably there
were some some breaks in there. And that
was like the highest and best use of
Snapchat for a 15-year-old girl in 2016
or whatever that was.
Um
And imagine if the goal was to try to
make her
tap less. You know, like how
how much of an impediment it would have
been to the experience that
both her and Snapchat wanted to create.
It's so fun to listen to this and the
examples you gave of it gives us a lot
of insight into the way your mind works
of just constantly unsatisfied with the
way other products work, with your
products. And I think that's core, like
Patrick is a good example of Stripe. I
feel like that's a recurring theme with
very successful product leaders is just
constantly unsatisfied and unhappy with
how things work.
Yeah.
I love just even the way you summarized
this, just like a really good reframing
of instead of obsessing with reducing
friction and reducing steps, instead
think, "How do I
how do I uh reduce the amount of
thinking the user has to do?" Uh I love
I've never heard of it described as like
you have to think about the ATP and
glucose being used to actually think,
and your goal is to reduce that versus
let's just reduce friction, reduce
clicks.
Yeah, I I think um
in my more cynical examples, I would I
would say to people like,
"Stop Stop what you're doing for a
second. Close your eyes, take a couple
deep breaths, and then pretend that
you're a natural human being,
and open your eyes again, and then look
at this thing and see can you figure out
what it's supposed to do or say, or what
your what action you're supposed to
take, or what the impact will be if you
take that action?"
There's a whole another related cycle,
but before I get into it cuz I know that
I'm
verbose, um I want to wrap up your your
last example of people being
unsatisfied. So, here's the quote that I
was trying to find. This is um
>> [snorts]
>> 2014, so like that that was the year
that Slack actually launched officially
uh in February, and this is now like
near the end of the year. I was
interviewed by uh MIT Technology Review
and asked if we were working to improve
Slack.
Uh I said,
"Oh god, yeah.
I try to instill this into the rest of
the team, but certainly I feel like what
we have right now is just a giant piece
of [__] Like, it's just terrible, and
we should be humiliated that we offered
this to the public."
Not everyone finds that motivational,
though.
So, I came into the office the next day,
and people had printed out on like 40
pieces of 8 and 1/2 by 11 paper that
quote, and like and pasted it up on the
wall. But to me that was like,
"You should be embarrassed by it." Like,
it should be a perpetual desire to
improve. You shouldn't have to be like,
"Oh, this is great." And you could be
proud of individual pieces of work, but
in the aggregate, if you can't see
almost limitless opportunities to
improve, then you shouldn't be designing
the product, or you shouldn't be in
charge of the company, or you shouldn't
um
almost nothing,
you know, again, you could reduce it
down to a tiny feature, is anywhere
close to to perfect. And if A, that's
acknowledged freely inside the
organization,
and B, people think about like
continually improving as the goal, and
that could be like Six Sigma, Toyota
Kaizen, like that kind of side of thing,
or it could be that story that um
I can't remember his name right now, but
the guy who started Bridgewater tells
about um Ray Dalio. Yeah, Ray Dalio. Uh
in his book talks about
um Michael Jordan learning to ski. Every
time he messed up, he wanted the ski
instructor to tell him exactly what he
was doing wrong because to him every one
of those was like a gem that he could
collect, and and he could, you know,
actually become a good skier, and what
he wanted to do was become a good skier.
That requires a lot of trust inside the
organization. Um
but if you can get to the point where
like, "Hey, we're all trying to
to find improvements, we're trying to be
critical of each other, we're trying to
make this as great as it can possibly
be."
Um
Not always, not with every person, but
most of the time with most people you
can get them to the point where that
like really direct criticism is actually
motivational. It is like, you know,
people are
uh
grateful to have like the feedback,
whether that's coming from their peers
inside the company or from end users of
the product cuz you realize, "Oh yeah,
that is
that is bad, and we should fix it."
This episode is brought to you by
Lovable. Not only are they the fastest
growing company in history. I use it
regularly, and I could not recommend it
more highly. If you've ever had an idea
for an app, but didn't know where to
start, Lovable is for you. Lovable lets
you build working apps and websites by
simply chatting with AI. Then you can
customize it, add automations, and
deploy it to a live domain. It's perfect
for marketers spinning up tools, product
managers prototyping new ideas, and
founders launching their next business.
Unlike no-code tools, Lovable isn't
about static pages. It builds full apps
with real functionality, and it's fast.
What used to take weeks, months, or
years, you can now do over a weekend.
So, if you've been sitting on an idea,
now is [music] the time to bring it to
life. Get started for free at
lovable.dev.
That's lovable.dev.
This makes me think about a Let's call
it a rant that you have about how it
takes a lot of work to make anything
work at all. That just the default state
is not working. You just share Share
what you share there.
Yeah. Um I mean, so this is a lot to do
with um
And maybe this is more recent than other
shows I've been in politics a lot for a
um
But uh By the way, if any of your Anyone
listening to this can help me find this
tweet storm from somewhere between 2016
and 2020. I don't have a precise idea,
and it was this guy's thread about how
hard it was to get um
a stop sign set up. And I think it I
believe it was in response to someone
claiming that Bitcoin is going to
replace US dollars. Uh
It was something something about crypto.
And his point was like, "Here's what
happened when we tried to get a stop
sign put up on a residential street in
my neighborhood." And the literal years
it took and the number of agencies that
were involved, like the engineering
department, traffic planners, the HOA,
and the
I don't remember all of the
organizations um because I think if I
did, then I could search better and find
this again cuz it was truly a
masterpiece of how difficult it is to
get a stop sign put up in in most
places.
The message that I hear from most
politicians, and unfortunately this
works really well, is
you know, things should be good, but
they're not because someone is doing
something bad, which is preventing the
goodness. So,
um
billionaires are making things
unaffordable, or immigrants are taking
your jobs, or um
lazy freeloaders are sucking off the
government teat and causing us all have
to pay more taxes or something like
that. The reality is like almost nothing
works. It's It's actually another call I
sent This case John has a great
encapsulation of this, and I'm sure
you've you're familiar with it, like
that It ends with the world is a museum
of passion projects because for anything
to get done at all requires like
not just the resources and and effort
you know, required to instantiate that
thing in the in the real world, but all
of the politicking and the sociology and
the convincing and um
There's a book called Why Nothing Works
recently, which is like
It's not an
I'm sorry to the author if they
They doubt they're listening, but just
give It's not like an amazingly written
book. I I found it like um
a little bit repetitive, uh but the the
content was really incredible. It's just
explaining why it's so hard and how
there's this progressive increase in the
number of of vetoes that are available
for any kind of course of action and how
difficult it is. And this shows up in
like, you know,
in permitting for new construction and
stuff like that. But it also shows up
obviously inside of organizations. And
the challenge is that people
A, I think this is
evolutionary, biological.
Uh it's hard for us to understand the
world except by anthropomorphizing it.
And so it like if it didn't rain this
year, it's because a god is mad, and
probably because we didn't sacrifice
enough goats something last last year.
It's hard for people to understand just
that
well, weather is incredibly complex and
chaotic and ecosystems and climatology
and all that.
Same thing with the world. Like if if I
uh am struggling to
uh
you know, pay all of my bills and be
able to afford me a little bit of
luxury in the sense of like a vacation
or a present for my kids or whatever,
it's got to be somebody's fault. Like
there has to be a decision that's made
somewhere.
And the reality is everything is so
complicated. Everything is so
multivariate. Uh it's not satisfying.
It's a terrible political message. Um
it's much easier to say that there is
like
uh
Well, we understand why things are bad
in the way that you're concerned about,
and it's turns out that it's someone's
decision. Um
and because of them, it's bad. And it so
if we got rid of them or
you know, were able to overcome their
decision, overturn it, um and institute
our own thing, then things would be good
for you.
Uh
And this really to me shows up inside of
organizations as well. You know, I'll
pause there. Uh I know kind of along
those lines you're a
a big uh believer in something called
Parkinson's Law. Yeah, so that the
original of that is I think it's 1956.
It's an article in The Economist
by Parkinson. Um
And uh
the maxim is work expands to fill the
time available for its completion.
And
the way that shows up This is a little
bit subtle. So, like um one of the
things I found since I don't have a job
is there's much less time pressure, and
and that maxim like uh if you want
something done, give it to a busy
person,
the inverse is also true that like if
you're not that busy, wow, basic things
take a really long time. And so
Parkinson actually starts off with his
example of like, you know, writing and
posting a letter.
Um and I I don't remember who he used
for the first example, but someone who's
like, you know, incredibly busy and has
all these things they have to respond
to. And then another case, like a
retired woman who has all the time in
the world, and it takes her a long time
to write the letter. It takes her a long
time to put it in the envelope and then
go to the post office and post it.
But the real meat of it is um
for me later, when he talks about the
size of the organization. He uses a
bunch of examples. This is again 1950s,
so
uh and he's British. Um
So, he's looking at the the Royal Navy,
and specifically he's looking at a chart
that shows the relationship between the
number of capital ships in the Navy, the
number of sailors, uh and the number of
administrators. And very familiar graph
for for people looking at like
any part of government, any part of like
the relationship between the number of
administrators at a university and the
number of students and faculty, the
teaching faculty. Where it's like, okay,
the number of ships goes like this, and
the number of sailors is like right
along with it, and the number of
administrators goes like this.
And the reason this this ties into the
work expands to fill the time available
for its completion is um
people hire, and they train, and uh
Here's the
kind of sad truth for anyone running a
company
is there are exceptions. There's like
certain types of engineers that are
exceptional to this, but the
overwhelming majority of people you hire
want to hire more people who report to
them. And it's not because they're evil.
It's not because they're stupid. In
fact, they're smart because everyone
knows that the number of people report
to you correlates with like your career
trajectory, your the the amount of money
that you're paid, the the amount of
authority you have inside the
organization, and on and on and on. So,
like we would hire 27 year old product
managers in Slack who immediately want
to hire someone. It's like, "What the
hell What would that person do?" And
they're like,
They articulate it this way, but
essentially it's like, "Well, that
person would do the product management,
and then I would do strategy."
Classic. It's It's really
I think the essential thing to
understand about this is it's not
because people are evil, and it's not
because they're stupid. And it's to me
very related to the everything is
complex. Um
and uh if you
I maybe this is my
Butterfield's Law. I haven't thought
about this before, but I I tweeted this
a very very long time ago. Like if you
um
Everything is simple if you have no idea
what you're talking about.
Um
So,
the the other side of that is like if
something seems simple, probably you
don't understand it.
And
you know, there's obvious exceptions to
that, but for anything that involves a
large organization or a lot of human
beings, if
the problem seems simple, you don't get
it. So, every budget process
no head of engineering, no head of
sales, no CFO, no GC is ever going to
come back and say like, "Oh, I actually
think like next year we can just hire
fewer people, or we're going to keep it
flat, or we're going to like shrink
through attrition cuz we don't need any
more people to do what we're doing." Not
because they're evil, not because
they're stupid. Uh but it's an almost
overpowering impulse inside the
organization that often leads to
disastrous results. And so, there's a
I'll give one example from Slack's
history, and I
you know, I have tried in the past to
disguise this example so that no one
feels bad about it, but I
Fortunately, the specifics are so
important to the example that it's not
disguised, and so I'll just reiterate
that the people involved aren't stupid
or or evil. Um and one example that's um
This is from the outside. So, the
example inside of Slack was um
We introduced threads, which is the
ability to reply to a message inside of
a channel. And let's say you, Lenny,
post a message. I, Stewart, replied to
it. You will automatically get a
notification. And now Sarah, later on,
replies to the same message. Both you
and I,
um as people who have posted in that
thread, will receive a notification that
there's been more activity. And so what?
So, like, you know, every single time
anyone replies to it.
So, when the feature
first was um
released or like when we did the final
product review before it was released,
the input box was pre-populated with at
the person before you in the thread.
And I you know, I was using the feature
and I would like
put the insertion point there, select
all, delete, and then start writing my
message.
And it's
even if I wanted to at someone
specifically, I almost never remember to
start my sentence with at I cuz it just
made it hard to
you know, reference what they were
saying before.
So, I said get rid of this because A, I
think most people
won't use it or if they
uh if they did want to at someone,
they're not going to want to do it at
the beginning of the sentence. And by
the way, you're teaching them to use the
product wrong because it's important
that everyone understand that every
previous poster in this thread will
automatically receive a notification
unless they've muted it.
So, okay, we release it, 6 months goes
by, and suddenly the at thing comes
back. And so, I messaged someone on the
team and I said, "Hey, there's been a
regression at this super weird I don't
know what happened, but like the
at thing came back." And they said, "Oh,
no, this is on purpose.
We did a bunch of research." And so, I
was like, "What?"
And I went through this and it was
if I recall correctly, it wasn't even
like P95
certainty on this analysis, but it was
something like
when we do this, threads are 2.17
messages long versus 2.14 messages long
on average for when we don't do it.
And so, first of all,
why is a longer thread better? Like
maybe a maybe a shorter thread is
better. Like it's
fewer messages that people have to go
back and forth.
Also,
that's such a tiny difference. Also,
again, I don't remember the actual
statistical analysis, so I'm not going
to claim that it was um
in correct me, I pretty sure this was
outside the the bounds of certainty that
they could have But the real thing was
Oh my god. So, you guys
put flags in the product, you AB tested
it, you did the instrumentation, you
created tables in the in the database or
whatever you're using to record all of
that, you wrote queries to pull that,
you created charts based on that data,
you had meetings to discuss it.
And just like kind of unpacking
all of the things that would have had to
happen for this to come back. And it's
like, you know,
thousands of person hours kind of at a
minimum cuz any feature change at at
that scale decision is involving like a
dozen people,
engineering, QA, uh analytics teams,
product managers, user research, and
stuff like that.
The problem with that was So, I think it
was a bad idea, right? But the problem
with that was
the difference that you could possibly
achieve between having this feature and
not having this feature is like
this much, whatever units you want. The
cost of doing the analysis was this
much. So, it's guaranteed to be a loser.
Like there's just there's no world in
which anyone could imagine putting the
at previous respondent in the thread at
the beginning of the message could
possibly make that much of a difference
to
the quality of Slack and how how much
utility it provides to people and and
all of that.
But you know that
to to like put the feature flags in, to
ship new versions of the product, to put
the instrumentation in, to have it all
the API calls to record every action
that people take, to to do all the
analytics, to create the dashboard, to
put that, you know, paste the screenshot
of that into a Google Slides
presentation, to send the invitations to
the meeting, to schedule the meeting cuz
someone couldn't make it, to have
everyone sit down and look at the thing.
Like, you know, guaranteed loser. And
I know that you that Farid told you to
ask me about this um
hyperrealistic work-like activities. And
so, here's my my my grand theory.
Um hyperrealistic work-like activities
is goes along with this other concept
called known valuable work to do.
And when I say known, I mean both you
know what it is and you know that it's
valuable. And the problem with almost
every organization
at the very beginning, you have an
enormous amount of work that you know
what to do and you know that it's going
to be valuable. So, like starting a
business, open a bank account because
like there's almost infinite generative
value of opening a bank account. You you
have to do it. You it's very simple to
do. And so, at the very beginning of of
any startup, they're like, "I'm like
creating a user's table and I'm like
doing salting passwords and like you're
doing all the things that are kind of
absolutely necessary and everyone knows
exactly what they are. And so, that's
like everyone's going to work in the
morning and they're like, "Right on."
And like I have 10 things to do and
every single one of them is like
something I know how to do and it's like
definitely going to be valuable. Time
goes on and the relationship between the
supply of work to do and the demand for
doing work just starts to change. More
and more people get hired. Every product
manager wants to hire a junior product
manager. Every new person, you know, the
first person you bring in on the risk
and compliance team is like, "Oh my god,
we have there's so many risks and things
we have to be compliant with. We better
hire more people on my team to do more
risk and compliance work." Which
probably, you know, to some degree is
right, but we're going to have more and
more of those people and they're going
to call meetings with each other.
Um and now suddenly you have all these
people with work to do and you've done
all the easy, obvious stuff. And now
your questions are like, "God, should we
do FedRAMP High and make a GovSlack
version?" Which is going to require us
to have wholly separate physical
infrastructure for the hardware that
runs the the software and also a whole
different operations team which has only
US citizens on it. What is the possible
number of of dollars that we could make
from doing this and how much complexity
is going to be when we want to do
updates to the software? Should we
update two totally separate, independent
systems? And we're
it just gets out of whack. And so,
people end up like if you hire 17
product marketers, you're going to have
17 product marketers worth of demand for
work to do. And if you don't have
sufficient supply of product marketing
work to do, they're just going to do
other stuff. Again, very important, not
because they're stupid, not because
they're evil, but because they're like,
"I'm a product marketer and I want to
like be recognized for my work and my
spouse is like has um
uh criticized me because they think like
I should have already got promoted in
the last cycle and I really got to
demonstrate some wins here and whatever
it is." And so, people are like calling
meetings with their colleagues to
preview the deck that they're going to
show in the big meeting to get feedback
on whether they should like improve some
of the slides.
And that hyperrealistic work-like
activity is
superficially identical to work. Like we
are sitting in a conference room and you
are there's something being projected up
there and we're all talking about it.
And that's exactly what work is.
Now, hopefully not all of work in for
everyone inside of your company, but you
know, that's uh exactly what we do when
we're working, but this is actually a
fake bit of work and it's so subtle that
I I'll do it.
You know, our board members will do it.
Every exact will do it. And the further
you are from like having all of the
context and all of the information and
the decision-making authority and stuff
like that, the easier it is to get
trapped in this stuff and people will
just perform enormous amounts of
hyperrealistic work-like activities and
have no idea that that's what they're
doing. And
the
you know, the result of that I guess is
that if you are a leader, if you're a
manager, director, an executive, you're
the CEO, it's on you to ensure that
there is sufficient supply of known
valuable to do.
Um and there almost always is, but you
know, it's creating the clarity around
that, creating the alignment, making
sure everyone understands it that that's
what they're supposed to be doing. And
and then obviously doing it. Amazing. I
could listen to uh Stewart Rants all
day.
Hyperrealistic work-like activities. We
need a coin this.
Uh and the
>> it doesn't make a good acronym. It's
pretty ugly. So, we're not even going to
try.
And just to close the loop on that, the
the solution is uh the leader
recognizing this is happening and
stopping it. Telling people, "Why are we
spending time on this thing that is not
going to get us anywhere?" Yeah. And and
and that what you just said probably
isn't the best way because that sounds
like they're you know, you're chiding
them and they're dumb when it's actually
your responsibility to make sure that
there's, you know, sufficient clarity
around what the priorities are and you
know, explicitly saying no to things up
front and stuff like that. Rather than
being rude and saying like, "Hey, you
guys are bunch of idiots wasting your
time on this thing that doesn't matter."
Whose fault is it? You know, it's it's
the manager's fault, it's the VP of
whatever's fault, it's the
CX whatever. It's the Hopefully it's
like it's the the leader of the
organization that has the responsibility
to make sure that there is sufficient
known valuable work to do.
Um
and this that's actually harder than it
might appear.
Okay. Uh before we run out of time, I
want to touch on two other topics. One
is
when people think of Stewart
Butterfield, I think a lot of people
think of we don't sell saddles here.
Your legendary medium post that uh is
just I don't know, it's become a
historic piece of literature in the in
the annals of product building and in
startups. I haven't heard people ask you
much about this recently, so let me just
ask a couple questions. One is just what
was the what was the reason you put that
out? Why what what was the backstory on
writing that memo? Why was it necessary?
Well, it really was an internal memo and
as a bit of a digression,
um
one of the the crappy things about Slack
um is if all your corporate
communication is on email, depending on
exactly how it works and what system you
use, you probably walk away with an
archive of everything you said at
company X. Um if it's Slack, once you're
turned off, you like you lose access to
all that history. And so it's kind of
like, "Oh man, if I had only exported
all of my messages before I left, I
would have all this stuff." But that was
it was absolutely
verbatim. I did not change a word of
what I said inside the company. When I
think we were still eight people, maybe
you know, at most 10, but I I think it
was eight people. It was before Slack
launched even. Yeah, it was before Slack
launched. It was like when we were doing
a private beta and the point of it was
to like to start to
instill those
ideas as early as possible and really
create this alignment inside of that
small team so that it could process to
survive as we grew and and scaled. Um
and yeah, that that was the that was the
idea. And the gist just for people that
aren't super familiar with it, but we'll
link to it is just it's not enough just
to build a great product. You just as
much have to put it effort into
communicating what this does for them,
the problem this is solving for them,
the outcome this is going to achieve for
them. Is that a a good way to think
about it? Yeah, and again, you know,
like comparing it to beer or cars, um
beer is
goes back to pre-civilization. Cars are
obviously invented and but you know, so
at some point you had to convince people
why they would want a car instead of a
horse. Um
for your new um
AI-based recruiting tool or your
calendar app or whatever, there's some
reason why people you think that people
should use yours instead of the thing
that they're using now, which might be
like a wholesale one-for-one replacement
or more often is like a change in the
way that you're working that has a bunch
of other adjacencies and you want to
expand into these other categories and
while you're not just responsible for
creating the product, but also to a
certain degree creating the market and
and creating you know, this is book
positioning
um which is an absolute classic. It's
very short. I would recommend everyone
read it.
Where the the point of it is from my
perspective it's
almost impossible to create a net new
idea in someone's head. It's much easier
to take a couple of existing ideas and
and put them together. So it's much
easier to say it's like Jaws meets Star
Wars Star Wars or it's Uber for pets or
something like that than to come up with
like an
actual new idea, but you you have to do
that cuz you like
if your thing is different in any
significant way from the alternatives,
um you're not just creating the product,
you're creating the market. They're
really kind of one in the same. The
reason I wanted to touch on it is I
think still people continue to not
listen to this advice and can continue
to over-invest in more features, more
more products, things like that. Just
the the specific example of we don't
sell saddles here just to quickly
communicate this to folks and correct me
if I'm missing anything is just instead
of, "Hey, look at this amazing saddle we
bought." what you want to communicate is
here, "Go horseback riding. Look at this
incredible experience you can have." and
and then they
decide, "Oh [__] I need to go buy a
saddle to do that."
>> Yeah. And and
100% um that aspect of it is is not
original cuz I think that's something
that marketers have done for a long
time, surely in the in marcom and and
advertising. Like if you want to sell
Harley-Davidsons, there are people who
are going to geek out on the engines and
stuff like that and like the quality of
the leather and stuff like that. But
what you're selling is not the
motorcycle, you're selling like the open
road and freedom and the wind in your
hair. And if you're
Lululemon, you are obviously selling
yoga pants, but you're also selling like
health and aspiration and being the best
version of yourself and you know, a
bunch of other stuff. So selling that.
Oh my god, I forgot the classic version
of it. You know, like There's the ship
>> There's the instead of the the
screwdriver Oh. Oh yeah, the nail. Yeah,
the nail. Anyway. Yeah, what is that
one?
>> [laughter]
>> There's the Well, there's the one I
think about is instead of trying to
convince men to build a ship, uh instill
a yearning for the sea. Yes, exactly.
You know, it's a something that goes
back in in history. Mhm. Okay, let me
ask you about pivoting. Uh you are
potentially the king of pivots. You
started two companies, both famously
pivoted, both from video games, which is
why I asked you about that at the
beginning. Into very successful
companies.
I imagine many people come to you for
advice on pivoting. I I let me just ask
when folks come to you asking, "Should I
stick with my idea? Should I pivot?"
What sort of advice do you find most
helps them? Yeah, I mean, I think it's
um
partly
uh
it an intuition because like obviously
the decision is about like have you
exhausted of the possibilities?
Um
and in the case where you know, we were
working on Glitch, this game where we
used IRC for internal communication and
we added a bunch of IRC, which became
the proto-Slack. And I think Slack
had an enormous advantage in the fact
that we were working on this for several
years without actually explicitly
working on it and only doing the minimum
number of
features that were you know, absolutely
guaranteed to be successful in the sense
that it was so irritating that we
couldn't stand it anymore or such an
obvious improvement that we couldn't
help but take advantage of it.
We still had a like $9 million left and
everyone still liked the game and we
were all happy working on it, but it
would I think by that point I had
exhausted every
non-ridiculous
long shot idea to make it commercially
successful.
And so decided to um
to abandon it.
But, you know, the
default advice for anyone in anything is
persevere. It's like you know, kitten
hanging off the branch and the poster
says, "Hang in there." And you know, and
I think there's a idea that you just
like And then there's so many stories of
like
so-and-so started out going door-to-door
and was rejected by everyone and then
suddenly there was Nike or or something
like that. And like just if you stick
out stick it with it long enough, you'll
eventually be successful. I think you
have to really be
coldly rational and Now
you know, some of this shows up in the
book um thinking about Some of it's in
Andy second book.
The title of which I'm forgetting right
now, but I'm someone will will know it.
Yeah, Thinking Backwards and then yeah,
it was the last second one I forget. Uh
she actually uses Glitch and and Slack
as an example of like a smart fold
basically. Like I
my expected value here has diminished to
the point where
this alternative looks more attractive.
And the reason is say you have to be
coldly rational about it is because it's
[__] humiliating. You know, like like
we I convinced so many and you have to
convince so many people to get a company
off the ground. You have to go to
investors, you have to go to early
employees and say like you should leave
your other job and come work for this
because you know, here's the the
incredible future we're imagining. You
have to go to the press and you have to
make all these promises and you have
users and you feel like committed things
to the users and you've convinced them
to give up their time for this thing.
And so it's I I think for a lot of
people
it feels better to just keep doing it
until it dies
um of suffocation
due to lack of capital or something like
that uh than to to admit like, "Okay,
I was wrong. This didn't this didn't
work." And it's it's humiliating, it's
painful, it's like it's wrenching. It
has a bad impact. You know, like there's
when we shut down Glitch, there's a lot
of people who loved it and who spent all
of their free time and couldn't wait to
get home from work to go play it more
and that was their community and that
community just like disappeared. All
these people and all these identities
have been created. And obviously people
lost their jobs and and people who had
like moved their families to a different
city in order to take this job now
weren't going to have a job anymore. So
pivots aren't something I take lightly
and you shouldn't be um
I think it's very different to be like
there's three of us and we started
making this app and then we pivoted to a
different app. That doesn't really
count. You know, like if you're six
months into something, you're just
you're still messing around. You're
trying to figure out what it is that
you're you're building. It's not really
a pivot.
Obviously, in this case it worked out
great and there's survivorship bias and
it doesn't mean that everyone should
pivot all the time. Um
but I think it is creating the distance
so that you can
make an intellectual
rational decision about it rather than
an emotional decision is is essential.
I love all three pieces of advice of
just exhaust. Once you've exhausted all
the ideas, that's a really good time to
see what else is out there. Yeah,
exhaust all the all the good ideas. All
the good ideas. All the realistic, yeah.
Yeah. The
the point you made about just kind of
persevering, I just had Melanie Perkins,
CEO of Canva on the podcast. They went
through a hundred investors rejected her
before somebody finally decided to
invest and she just kept pushing. Yeah,
but I think that's a slightly different
example, right? Cuz like the she
believed in the Yeah, then she then she
believed in the in the concept of the in
the product and like in the in the
vision. They were just trying to figure
out the right articulation to get
investors who ended up being obviously
very very happy. Yeah,
extremely happy. Oh jeez.
Okay, maybe a final topic depending on
how time goes. I want to talk about
generosity.
I talked to a bunch of people, as I
said, that have worked with you and the
number one theme that came up again and
again and again when I asked them about
you and what they what has stuck most
with them is is just generosity. So I'm
going to read a few examples that I
heard from folks that are examples of
your generosity over the years.
So one person shared that
he needed a little money before
Christmas and you
he said, "Stewart literally walked me
out of the building, went to the cash
machine, handed me $500, told me to go
home to my family."
Other folks shared that when you you
talked about Glitch just recently when
you had to lay people off that you cried
real tears when you were laying people
off and then you spent an incredible
amount of time helping them find new
jobs and extending their severance pay,
and just taking it extremely extremely
seriously, much more than I think most
people feel like CEOs do.
Someone else shared that you paid 100%
of employees' health insurance to give
them just fewer things to think about.
Uh when you went public, you did a you
basically created the best possible
situation for employees. No lockup,
direct listing.
Also, with the structure of the Slack
deal, people said the acquisition is
very employee-friendly.
There's also just a bunch of ex- That's
employees. There's also just the way you
thought about customers. A few examples.
You gave free credits to businesses who
were struggling to pay the bills during
COVID. You released this fair billing,
which I think was very innovative at the
time, where you didn't charge you
stopped charging people for seats they
weren't using, even though they signed a
deal to charge for those seats. A lot of
times just you slipped release schedules
because you just wanted to make features
better and better for people.
So and I'll end with this quote. Stewart
is a leader who takes the responsibility
he feels for his employees personally,
and to which he extends the most
generous circumstances he can muster.
That feels worth celebrating.
So first of all, let me I just want to
celebrate you. I think it's really rare
and inspiring to
meet a leader like that. Clearly, you've
had a lot of impact on a lot of people.
I don't know exactly the question I want
to ask, but I guess was this is this
like an In what part is this
intentional? Just like this is how we
win. I'm going to be very generous and
help people because I know this will
help long term. How much of this is just
innate? This is just the way you are as
a person.
I I think a lot of it is just the way I
am as a person, and uh I had wonderful
parents who raised me right. But I think
there's also um
there is a little bit of a lesson there,
and I'm just going to assume people's
familiarity with the the prisoner's
dilemma.
Um
the
you know, acts of generosity to me are a
way of demonstrating that I am going to
cooperate as we iterate in this game.
Um and if you do that, then people will
also cooperate, and you both benefit.
Whereas if you never really know if the
other person is going to defect at the
first opportunity, um then your best bet
is to defect. And so, you know, there is
a game theoretic aspect.
Usually in games that are much much much
more complicated than uh the prisoner's
dilemma.
Um
I think another thing you know, one
thing we
uh
I didn't touch on before, but to me it
was important enough that at more than
one company all-hands, I made everyone
in the company like repeat this as a
chant. Um
it was in the long run, the measure of
of our success will be the amount of
value that we create for customers.
Um and then I wanted to be super clear
and explicit about that because it
should be if anything you're doing feels
like a little bit shady, a little bit
cheating, a little bit like um
maximizing
um
in the in the at the wrong moment, or
taking advantage of a customer, or
anything like that, we definitely
shouldn't do it because to me it was
just like I mean I think it's
uh
literally true, but it's also like an
uh an ethical way to run a business, and
and um it's not just that the ethics are
good. It's like there's advantages for
you. Like you're able to attract a
better class of employee. Like if all
your employees are are ethical, then
it's going to be a better place for
everyone to work, and you're going to be
happier, and you're going to have fewer
internal problems, and and all that
stuff.
Um
but I think it really is true that
there's no like especially in the long
run,
you can't like destroy value for your
customers and expect to be successful.
You have to actually make their lives
better. Um
and you can put effort into like
pointing it out to them, and and
demonstrating that you have created this
value, and stuff like that. But there's
no substitute for actually having
created it. And I think that
um
is incredibly important, and that
implies a real generosity, whether
that's in
negotiating terms with an an enterprise
deal, or that's like policy decisions.
You sometimes
So one one
time that it blew up in our face was our
SLA was like for any downtime, you get
100 times your money back.
Um which was like cuz it from my
perspective, it's like you know, if
we're down for 2 minutes, it doesn't it
it's like pennies. It doesn't really
make any difference. If we're down for
like 10 hours or something like that,
then we have bigger problems than paying
back people.
Okay.
Okay. Fast forward, we you know, we now
have hundreds of millions of dollars in
revenue, and we've gone public. And like
shortly after we go public, we have like
one of the biggest outages we've ever
had. I don't remember how long it was,
but it was like many hours. But by the
time we got to that scale, 100 times the
money back for like the third of a day
that we were down
was like
$8 million
or some something like that, which had
to be um
it didn't cost us any money because we
just gave it to people as forward
credits, but it meant that a bunch of
revenue that we had already anticipated
for the next quarter wasn't going to
show up because people's credits were
going to offset what they would have
otherwise paid us.
And so, uh we we definitely changed the
terms of service after that because
being a public company is a little bit
different. But uh you know, in every
other respect, I think you know, they
were all really important decisions that
were helpful in um in us becoming
successful.
And was that policy was automatic? Like
you didn't even have to claim it. It was
just automatically get this credit.
>> And and the default is you don't have to
pay if you let us know. And this was we
will automatically like proactively,
preemptively, without any input from
you, apply this credit to your account,
and just like send you a message that it
happened. And by the way, we will do it
on the aggregate
for downtime, even if the issue didn't
affect you as a as a customer.
>> [laughter]
>> Yeah.
What was that mantra again that you uh
had the company chant? I think this is a
really nice way to end it.
In the long run, the measure of our
success will be the amount of value we
create for customers.
Incredible. I'm just trying to picture
the entire team at Slack
Hundreds of people. It felt very like
Kim Jong or like Stalin or something
like that.
>> [laughter]
>> Well, on that note, most people don't
know this about you, but your
uh your actual name when you were born
is not Stewart. It was Dharma. Yeah. And
this all makes sense as you learn that.
Yeah, it's like I had My name is Dharma
Jeremy Butterfield. So my parents named
me, and when I was 12, I changed it
because I just like really wanted to be
normal, and for some reason I thought
Stewart was a normal name. And by the
way,
you'll notice this now that I said it.
Any character except for Stuart Little,
the mouse, um anytime you see a
character in in a movie, a novel, TV
show, whatever,
there's only the loser Stewart, and the
[__] Stewart. It's it's like it's
obviously in the collective
consciousness, a terrible name, and I
shouldn't have chosen it, and I regret
it. But by the time I realized that
Dharma and Greg had already come out, it
would have seemed like I was like, you
know, bandwagon jumping, and
people thought it was a girl's name,
even though in India, it's obviously
only a boy's name. I'm going to add just
one last little tidbit because I forgot
about this earlier on, and I think it
helps tie things together.
And it's called the owner's delusion.
And this is basically something I posted
on Twitter.
The person who came up with the name
later deleted their account, and so I
have no idea who it was or who to credit
for this. But what I had posted was and
this is a long time ago, before when
restaurant websites have gotten better,
and it doesn't really matter because
Google Local has taken over everything.
But this is like let's say 10 years ago.
There's five things you could possibly
want when you go to a restaurant's
website, and is their street address,
their phone number, the menu, the hours
of operation. Oh my god, I'm forgetting
the fifth thing.
Oh, and and making a reservation. How to
make a reservation.
Um
and again, this problem has like to some
extent taken care of. It's actually
really improved. But what you would get
was like this super slow loading photo,
the Ken Burns effect as it
and like and then like fading in, and
then some music starts playing, and then
if they show you the phone number, it's
not uh clickable, and it turns out it's
not even text that you can copy because
it's yes, it's an image. Um and they
don't have the hours, they don't put the
address or whatever. And it's just like,
I mean what?
For sure, whoever made this website for
the restaurant owner, and the restaurant
owner themselves have
definitely been in the position where
they went to somebody else's restaurant
website because they wanted to get the
address or the opening hours or the
phone number or whatever. So how why
does it end up like this? And what
should we call this? And the whoever
replied to the tweet, um she said
we should call it owner's delusion. And
I was like, oh my god, that's perfect.
And I think that
um
is incredibly powerful, and it what ends
up with the result like Apple naming
whatever that feature is called sleep,
which is like
it's too hard to understand what could
that can possibly mean. And that's why
like people anticipate
um despite the fact that
when they get to their web your website
for the first time, their their intent
is absolutely
the minimum number of micro points above
the threshold required for them to
actually take that action. You're like,
all right. Like welcome to my website,
and there's
>> [laughter]
>> there's a bunch of like BS, and there's
a bunch of like stuff that doesn't make
any sense, and the buttons aren't
clickable. It's unclear what to do next
because I think that my thing is so
important, and I don't recognize that
you
are at work, and you were late this
morning, and you have to go to the
bathroom, and you're just like you're
just like a regular human being who has
like
stuff going on. You're concerned that
your kids will [__] up, and they're
getting in trouble at school, and stuff
like that. They don't
they're not like subjects who paid money
to go to your play, and are sitting in
the audience and waiting for the curtain
to go up. They're like people who are
going to bounce in a fraction of a
second. And so everyone should always be
conscious of the audience's illusion. I
love that. What's the solution? Is it
have other people look at and give you
feedback? Is it And and like recognize
it. And unfortunately it's one of those
things like Murphy's law, like even
you're going wrong when you even when
you take into account Murphy's law.
But if you if you don't name it and
recognize it and discuss it and train
yourself to think in that way that
you know, take a breath, pretend you're
a regular person, and then look at this
again and see if it makes sense. I love
You're screwed. I love that you threw
this in here. I have a billion other
questions I I'm going to ask you in part
two when we do this someday. Uh Stewart,
thank you so much for doing this. Thank
you so much for being here.
Yeah, thank you for having me, Lenny. I
really enjoyed it. Same same here.
Bye, everyone.
Thank you so much for listening. If you
found this valuable, you can subscribe
to the show on Apple Podcast, Spotify,
or your favorite [music] podcast app.
Also, please consider giving us a rating
or leaving a review as that really helps
other listeners find the podcast. You
can find all past episodes or learn more
about the show at lennyspodcast.com.
>> [music]
>> See you in the next episode.